I am John M. Lawrence, Jr. I was born here in Brown in
October 1899 in a house located at West 16th and
Parker Street. In 1907, my parents moved to
East 26th and Texas Avenue, where they erected a
two-story frame colonial home. I lived there
until maturity. I have lived in Brown all of my life
and have been engaged in various activities. My
first occupation was shipping clerk for a
wholesale grocery company. Then I went into a
combination automobile dealership garage and
service station in 1923,
which I operated until 1931.
At that time, I became book agent for a minor heart
company and also worked part-time as an appraiser
or inspector for the Regional Agricultural
Credit Corporation. Mr. Lawrence, do you
remember the name of the wholesale grocery that
you worked for? Yeah, Lawrence. Lawrence. OK,
fine. Lawrence.
On June 1st,
1933, I became a cashier of the City National Bank.
My first banking experience, I became chief loan
officer on the third day of my association with the
bank and continued in that capacity for 27 years,
the last 17 of which I was president of the bank.
Since 1960,
I have been retired.
And at present, my only business connection is a
director of Brown Building and Loan Association.
Thank you, Mr. Lawrence. Could you tell us perhaps
a little about your parents, where they were born
and how they came to Bryan? My father was born 10
miles north of Bryan in the Alexander community in
1873.
After receiving about three and a half years of
formal education, He moved to Brown at about age 10
and lived here the remainder of his life. My mother
was born in Brown across the street from the First
United Methodist Church. As a small child, she
moved to another house just south of the
courthouse on East 26th at Washington. And she
lived in the shadow of the courthouse practically
all the rest of her life. My father died at age 64,
but my mother lived to be 95 years and seven months.
Do you remember when your mother was born?
February 17th, 1874. 1874.
You're younger than your father. Younger than my
father.
Your father came here at a young age. Do you know or
did he ever tell you what attracted him to Bryan?
Well, his father had been a farmer and stockman,
but he moved to Bryan and set up a lumber company.
Was that named Lawrence also? It was, but at his
death, he left the business to his daughter, who
had married him, Mr. Parker. From then on, it was
known as Parker. I
see. Did you remember your grandfather at all? No,
I didn't. I never knew either of my grandparents. I
didn't know my paternal grandmother. I did know
them. My maternal grandmother. My husband was
dead. I never saw him. Do you know anything about
her, the maternal grandmother? Yes, she was a
native of Bryan, too. And she was a Miss Hall, the
daughter of old Dr. Hall, who was the only doctor in
Bryan. For a good many years.
Well, that's interesting. I guess perhaps you
could tell us just a little bit about your life. How
you saw Brian grow and what you think is
significant about it. Well, in my first
recollection, Brown was a town of some 875 people,
about half of whom were black.
Brown, the first growth of Brown, real growth,
came in 1913 when the federal government created
the extension service and named Texas A&M as
headquarters for Texas. That brought about 75
families into Brazos County.
A&M provided a house for the director. The other 74
families had to do the best they can, and most of
them came into Brown. And they rented everything
available. But that stimulated a little
building, quite a bit of building for a town of that
size. Because by that time, I imagine Brown was a
town of maybe 1,800 to 2,000 people.
That was the first real
economic thrust, I suppose you'd call it. Well,
back in those early recollections, who would you
say were the controlling families in Bryan, or the
socially... besides your own, I'm sure, your
father... Well, there were two factions in the
town, as you might expect. One was known as the
Parker-Haston faction. That was... my father's
brother-in-law who operated the lumberyard and
also was president of the city national bank and
the astons were a big plantation owners razzles
bottom but they headquartered in brown and the two
of them were those two families were associated
together the other family was headed by old Dr.
J.W. Howell.
Do you remember anything about the Howell family?
Yes, he had three sons, and with them he controlled
a bank, lumberyard cotton compressed and
acquired a substantial acreage in the brazos
bottom so he was in direct conflict with that
parker hasson faction and because he controlled
the warehouse and cotton the cotton warehouse and
compressed And those people did not want to
patronize him. They organized another
compression lab and set it up near where I was born.
I think you'd mentioned your father had been a
rancher. Was that right? Or was he in the cotton
business? Grandfather. Or grandfather, pardon
me. He was a farmer in Maryland, but he also had
livestock, more sheep than cattle. Did your
father ever say anything about what kind of crops
he grew in those days? Cotton was the main thing. It
was a cash crop, and corn was to feed his mules and
livestock. That was before the day of the grain
salt. There was no maize or anything like that. Of
course, hay, but...
Rolling right along. Cotton was his cash crop. How
about... I imagine he had a family.
plot up close to the home where they grew their own
vegetables, things of that sort that they wanted
to do? Well, actually,
this is a surprise, but those early Texans didn't
bother with the garden. They ate meat and bread and
bought little things along from the grocery
store, but they didn't need much. I see. Lots of
them didn't even keep a milk cup. Both condensed
milk. So I guess the, do you think the diet has
changed any? Your grandfather and your father,
what they ate as they grew up as opposed to what you
grew up? I guess you had more and different foods.
Well, when I was a child, we had beefsteak for
breakfast. And we continued that, I guess, until I
was 12 or 14 years old. And then we switched to bacon
and eggs, things like that. But was beefsteak
fairly common for most of the families, do you
think, at that time? That was the usual diet.
That's the usual diet. And they had what they
called meat markets. Lots of the husbands would go
down before breakfast, buy meat, stop by the
saloon, have a drink or two, and then come home and
the wives would cook breakfast. Well, were there
very many saloons here in those days? There were 13
on Main Street. 13 on Main Street. They all did
pretty good business? All of them got rich. All of
them got rich. I noticed some while back, reading a
little bit about Brian, that one of the first
jails, perhaps it was a county jail, was stuck up
into a tree, I think 20 feet or something above it.
Do you ever heard anything about that? Well, that
wasn't an actual jail. That was what they used to
punish obstreperous prisoners. put them up there
and leave them out there in the weather. I see.
Maybe three or four days, sometimes in the dead of
winter, sometimes in the hot summer. Rain, sleet,
whatever. Usually when they came out of there,
they wasn't behaving. But the first jail I
remember
was on the grounds where the president's
courthouse is. I guess that would be the northwest
corner. That was the first jail I remember. But
they had the trees there that they put the
obstreperous prisoners in, as I call them. And of
course, at that time, I lived just across the
street. And we used to go over there. look at them.
Well, you lived pretty close to
Miss Carnes, Miss Donut, as they call her. Yes, we
lived as well. The families knew each other. Oh,
yes. They were one of the wealthiest families in
the county. He operated a lady's store, old man,
J.W. Coates. And then his son took it over. He was
W.J. Coates. They were a bunch of initials. He
operated that store a long time. They also brought
quite a bit of acreage in the grass and spotted it.
People of large means, as is evident. Her husband
was a publisher of the Brown Daily Eagle when he
died as a young man.
You never remember.
Of course, they left just one block from us.
Those youngsters, you talked a little earlier
about playing football around here. Just
neighborhood. Just neighborhood. There
probably wasn't any organized football, was
there, or not much? They had two teams in. They
had... Eastern Tigers and
Wildcats, they used to play all the time. They were
grown men, what I call them, grown men. They were 18
to 25, just local. Of course, they had organized
football in A&M as far back as I can remember. And
then... I guess along about 1910, they started
football in high school.
Where was this you played? And do you remember
about when it was where you had this occasion where
you were playing safety and moving backwards? I
was in the dirt street between my house where we
lived and the courthouse. And the courthouse.
Yes, it was. on what is now Texas Avenue between
25th and 26th Street. You see, we played on that
street because the side streets, 25th and 26th, in
those days, the grocery stores delivered
groceries all over town. If we tried to play on one
of those streets, why, those delivered wagons and
interfered with our game. But they very seldom
made that cost. Of course, there was no traffic
because there was no automobile.
At that time, there were five automobiles in the
county. Do you remember hearing
anything about the effect of the railroads here
when it first came out? Well, that is what
caused... The growth of Brown, the establishment
of Brown in the first place. You see, Houston and
Texas centrally was known then. Ran from
Galveston to Houston. And then they extended it
north to Hampton. And that was the terminus of the
railroad. Then they extended it to this community
of Milliken down here. But then they had a terrible
epidemic of yellow fever down there and
practically filled out the town. So the railroad
extended it farther north to Brown and
established the town. At that time, Boonville out
here was the county seat of Brazos County. But when
the railhead came to Brown and began to bring so
much business here, you see people came to Brown
from as far away as Texarkana, Shreveport, parts
of Oklahoma.
We had a big wagon yard here. They'd come in here and
load that freight and then
wagon it back to the home. They also brought the
cotton and whatever hides, things like that to
Brown, loaded them on the railroad, shipped them
to Galveston. I noticed, of course, the railroad
tracks, the spur anyway, this goes right down
behind the old stores. It's pretty handy for the
merchants. Well, that was the reason they located
Main Street where it was because the merchants
could part on Main and their backs would lead to the
railroad and they could unload from the train on a
boxcar because they'd have a spud, and they'd send
the boxcars back to the separate stores and load
direct to save a double-handle. And that's the
reason they're located on Main Street. And then
behind the end came the International in Great
Northern. It also came from Houston, it came to
Brown, and they ran the down Brown Street. They
went all the way to the oil mill, which was down, I
guess, about 14th Street, out of town, past where I
was born. There used to be a cotton oil mill, a
cotton seed oil mill down there. The Howell
Fraction owned it, too. Howell Fraction. Do you,
back in your early recollections, of course your
parents, understand, had the, had a
wholesale grocery, is that right? Right here, my
father organized that in 1912.
He had a very career, like I told you, he only had
about three and a half years of formal education,
but he was a an avid reader, studied,
and he was more or less on his own from the time he was
about 12 years old. He
delivered papers, organized paper routes, put in
a shoeshine business and had a neighbor. I hadn't
run it for me quite as much as a 12-year-old boy. And
he went on to Paris with me. Then he and Mr. Morris
formed a partnership and moved down to Steel Store
in the Chrysler's Bottom. Then around to General
Store, including a saloon. Then they moved to
Brown. set up a retail grocery and a bottling
company. Soft drinks? Soft drinks.
Sarsaparilla, things like that. And then my
father, of course, they were both
under-financed, no money. My father Grandpa
County Treasurer was re-elected and he moved the
office from the courthouse down to his store. They
had that retail grocery and of course the money
from that office and the tide of the mobile
especially through the panic of 1907. And then in
1912 the
owner of the building wanted to bring his nephew
over here from England and set him up in the grocery
business, so he refused to extend John M. Lawrence
and Company's lease. So Mr. Moring went across the
street and became manager of Parker-Aston
Hardware Company. which was a newly organized
business and my father started operating it and he
continued in that business until his death in
1938. I understand that when the courthouse was
built that there's quite a bit of land speculation
around there they thought the merchants would all
try to build around the courthouse like we see in so
many cities? Well, a few of them did, but because of
the situation of the railroad, they never could
overcome that.
Most of the stores preferred to be down on the
railroad for convenience and lower overhead as
well. You don't recall whoever put their money
into land speculation around the courthouse,
whether they were upset about it or... No, I don't
remember much about it. In fact, there never was
much, but the telephone company was there just
across. They're still in that same location. Of
course, they're spread out, but that's a big
office. That same thing. It was there when I was a
boy. And then on that block, there was a general
merchandise, largely a feed store, which later
failed.
There was a law
office. The lady had a millinery store. And
there was a tombstone factory or sale How about
your education? Can you tell us a little bit about
where you went to school and how long?
I went to the public school here in Brown. I started
on what was known as Westside. It's a boys' school
now. It was a brand-new building. And I went there
two years, and then I transferred over to the east
side, where they had the entire school from first
grade to year 11. And then at that time, you did not
have to have a high school diploma to enter A&M. And
I had enough credits to get in, so I entered A&M in
1915, incidentally at the age of 15. That's quite
an accomplishment. And I went to A&M three years,
and now my husband's a major. They only had two
schools at that time, agriculture and
engineering. And then World War I broke out, and in
1918 they lowered the draft age to 18 and also
reduced the age required to hold a commission to
18, so I entered the training camp. was
commissioned as second lieutenant.
I got out of the service on December the 22nd. And
then January 1st, I enrolled at the University of
Texas in business administration. And I went
there two years, but I never did graduate anyway.
high school, A&M, and university. Well, that's
something to go that long in a university and not
having graduated from high school. That's quite
an achievement there in itself. Well, I didn't
have to have an diploma in A&M. I built up enough
credits to enter the university, but I lost so many
in the transfer that I wasn't anything like them.
Let
me move the tape over to the other side. I think
we've come close to the end. So we don't get
interrupted.